.. _whats_new:

================================================================================
What's New in 5.10
================================================================================

..
   Conform to the following format for new features.
   Big/important features follow this structure
   - **<feature title>**: <one-to-two line description>, :ref:`<link to docs>`
   Minor features are added in a separate block in each section as:
   - `<one-to-two line description <http://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/#>`__.


OpenNebula Core
================================================================================
- **Update hashing algorithm**, now passwords and login tokens are hashed using sha256 instead of sha1. Also csrftoken is now hashed with SHA256 instead of MD5
- **NUMA and CPU pinning**, you can define virtual NUMA topologies and pin them to specific hypervisor resources. NUMA and pinning is an important feature to improve the performance of specific workloads. :ref:`You can read more here <numa>`.
- **Live update of context information**, running VMs can update its context information and trigger the contextualization scripts in the guests, :ref:`see here <vm_updateconf>`.
- **Uniform thread-safe random generator**, for random numbers use Mersenne Twister generator with uniform distribution.
- **VM operations configurable at user and group level**, use attributes ``VM_USE_OPERATIONS``, ``VM_MANAGE_OPERATIONS`` and ``VM_ADMIN_OPERATIONS`` in user or group template, :ref:`more information <oned_conf_vm_operations>`
- **Unified objects' secrets handling**, secrets are encrypted and decrypted in core, drivers get secrets decrypted `see here <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3064>`__.
- **Allow VM reschedule in poweroff state**, `see here <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3298>`__.
- **System wide CPU model configuration**, default cpu model for kvm could be set in config file :ref:`see here <kvmg_default_attributes>`.
- **KVM configuration per Host or Cluster**, all :ref:`kvm default attributes <kvmg_default_attributes>` can be overriden in Cluster and Host.

Other minor features in OpenNebula core:

- `FILTER is now a VM_RESTRICTED attribute <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3092>`__.
- `Increase size of indexes (log_index and fed_index) of logdb table from int to uint64 <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/2722>`__.

Storage
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- **Custom block size for Datablocks**, to allow users to modify block size for dd commands used for :ref:`Ceph <ceph_ds>`, :ref:`Fs <fs_ds>` and :ref:`LVM datastore drivers <lvm_drivers>`.
- **Configurable VM monitoring**, you can configure the frequency to monitor VM disk usage in datastores drivers (:ref:`Fs <fs_ds>` and :ref:`LVM <lvm_drivers>`). Check :ref:`the oned.conf reference guide <oned_conf>`.
- **Extensible mixed modes**, different TM drivers can be easily combined by implementing custom driver actions for any combination. Check the :ref:`storage integration guide for more details <mixed-tm-modes>`.
- **Support for Trash in Ceph datastore**, `Allows user to send disks to the trash instead of removing them <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3147>`_.

Networking
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- **DPDK Support**, the Open vSwitch drivers include an option to support DPDK datapaths, :ref:`read more here <openvswitch_dpdk>`.
- **Extensible Network Drivers**, You can extend network driver actions with customizable hooks, :ref:`see more details <devel-nm-hook>`.
- **Deprecate brctl**, ip-route2  toolset replaces brctl to manage bridges for the KVM/LXD networking.

Sunstone
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- **Two Factor Authentication**, with this method, not only does it request a username and password, it also requires a token generated by any of these applications: Google Authentication, Authy or Microsoft Authentication. :ref:`You can read more here <2f_auth>`.


vCenter
===============================================================================

- `All VMM driver actions receive relevant information through stdin, saving oned calls and thus enhancing performance <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/1896>`__.
- `The possibility to change the port used when OpenNebula connects to vSphere's API <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/1208>`__.

OneFlow & OneGate
===============================================================================
- **Remove attributes from VMs**, the onegate server API supports a new option to delete attributes from VM user template :ref:`via onegate command <onegate_usage>`.

CLI
================================================================================
- **Better output for CLI tools**, new options to adjust and expand the output to the terminal size, also it allow better parsing of output, :ref:`check the documentation (expand, adjust and size attributes) for more details <cli>`.
- **Show raw ACL string in oneacl**, the full string of each rule can be shown. It's disabled by default :ref:`check oneacl for more information <cli>`.

Packaging
================================================================================
- **Packaged all required Ruby gems**, installation is now done only from operating system packages and ``install_gems`` is not necessary to run after each installation or upgrade anymore, :ref:`check the front-end installation <ruby_runtime>`.
- `Debian and Ubuntu debug packages <https://github.com/OpenNebula/packages/issues/55>`_, debugging information for the OpenNebula server are now dedicated package **opennebula-dbgsym**.
- `Build optimizations <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/779>`_, packages build respects the proposed compiler and linker parameters of each platform with additional hardening features.
- `Node packages revert changes on uninstall <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3443>`_, configuration changes in libvirt made during the KVM node package install. are reverted on uninstall.
- Avoid `node_modules files in Sunstone package <https://github.com/OpenNebula/packages/issues/81>`_, built-time only data were dropped from distribution package.
- `Sunstone package should not provide empty /var/lib/one/sunstone/main.js <https://github.com/OpenNebula/packages/issues/54>`_, temporary file with initially empty content is not contained in the package, but created by post-install scripts.
- `Datastores directories contained in the package <https://github.com/OpenNebula/packages/issues/68>`_, initial datastores directories are not contained in the package anymore.
- Lower `services restart interval <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3183>`_, decreases limit for automatic restart of core services and consistently sets automatic restart to all services.
- `Augeas lens for oned.conf <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/pull/3741>`_, server package contains Augeas lens to manipulate ``oned.conf``-like files.
- Optional Python bindings are now build also for Python 3 -- package `python3-pyone <https://github.com/OpenNebula/packages/issues/106>`_.
- `Reviewed sudo-enabled commands <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3046>`_, obsolete sudo-enabled commands were removed and rest commands are now enabled by each installed OpenNebula component package (server, node KVM, node LXD) to provide more fine-grained security.

IPAM Drivers
================================================================================
- IPAM driver scripts now recieve the template of the AR via STDIN instead of via arguments, :ref:`see more details <devel-ipam>`.

Other Issues Solved
================================================================================
- `Fixes an issue that makes the network drivers fail when a large number of secturiy groups rules are used <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/2851>`_.
- `Remove resource reference from VDC when resource is erased <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/1815>`_.
- `Validate disk-snapshot-id cli parameter to prevent confusing conversion <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3579>`_.
- `Fix *Argument list too long* error in migrate action <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3373>`_.
- `Fix cluster CPU/MEM reservations <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3630>`_.
- `Fix issue with wrong controller for multiple scsi disks <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/2971>`_.
- `Fix issue with Context ISO device vs. KVM models <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/2587>`_.
- `Fix delete IPAM address ranges when deleting the vnet <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3070>`__.
- `Fix multiple click to back button when instantiate multiple VM <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3715>`__.
- `Fix add and remove cluster in datastore's table <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/3594>`__.
- `Fix remove resource from VDC if this is removed from your infrastructure <https://github.com/OpenNebula/one/issues/2623>`__.